Add "react testing guidance" blogpost: first draft (still WiP); fixed linkedin info (use real name) (#105)
alasco-tech/alasco-tech.github.io: src/content/blog/2023/09/13/react-testing-guidance.md

Before reading this document, it's recommended that you become familiar with the **main concepts** of _Testing Library_. You can find more information about it [here](https://testing-library.com/docs/) and [here](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/example-intro).

We aim to follow best practices and avoid common mistakes when using _React Testing Library_. In [this great article](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/common-mistakes-with-react-testing-library), you can find helpful guidance and learn more about these common mistakes.

🤓 [Here](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/cheatsheet/) you can find a cheatsheet which is a short guide to all the exported functions in _React Testing Library_.

## What should I test and how to write tests?

### Test pyramid

I am pretty sure you have already heard about the test pyramid many times before. It looks like this:
![Test pyramid](./images/test-pyramid.png "Test pyramid")
[Image source](https://www.innoq.com/en/blog/tests-granularity/)

> 🏎️ The basic idea is that most of the tests in the application should be isolated **unit tests**. These tests are not difficult to write or maintain.

Reviewer: The two descriptions for integration/e2e help define what the tests do, what do you think about a small tweak here for unit tests?

```suggestion
🏎️ The basic idea is that most of the tests in the application should be isolated **unit tests**. These tests are typically less complex and focus on testing small, specific parts of the software
```

🚀 The next level in the pyramid are **integration** tests. You need them to test the integration between different modules and components to make sure that they are working together as you expect them to.

> 🐢💸 The last part are **E2E** tests which are very expensive, because they treat the system as the whole and interact with it as the actual users. It’s not only time consuming to write them but also to **maintain**.

Reviewer: I'd expect it to be a common term in our audience already (well, I assume), but I still think it's good practice to expand acronyms in the text when they're first used to help reader comprehension

```suggestion
🐢💸 The last part are **end-to-end (E2E)** tests which are very expensive, because they treat the system as the whole and interact with it as the actual users. It’s not only time consuming to write them but also to **maintain**.
```

---

❗️The test pyramid is an important concept to keep in mind, but it should be viewed as a **guideline** rather than a **strict rule** that must be blindly followed.

That's a nice theory, but how does it apply to our frontend tests? 🤔

## React Tests - case study

Before we start analysing a concrete example, let’s stop here for a while and think: what makes a test a **good** test?

### What are good tests?

First of all, frontend tests are totally different from backend tests. Why is that?

> The more your tests resemble the way your software is used, the more confidence they can give you.

> -- Guiding principles from React Testing Library
> 
> [Quotation source](https://testing-library.com/docs/guiding-principles)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-- [Guiding principles from React Testing Library](https://testing-library.com/docs/guiding-principles)
```

> [React Testing Library](https://testing-library.com/docs/) (which we use) encourages us to write all the tests from the user's perspective (to act as a user). So basically we try to test what the user sees and how they interact with our system. It means that the test pyramid **does not apply** to our concept as much. If we should write tests from the user perspective, it means that we should have **mostly integration** and **e2e** tests and very **few unit** tests 🧐. Integration tests are covered using _React Testing Library_.

Reviewer: Small tweak here lets us factor out the 'basically' (sometimes downgraders like "basically"/"simply"/"just" can alienate less experienced readers/set off the imposter syndrome if this is a new concept to them)

```suggestion
[React Testing Library](https://testing-library.com/docs/) (which we use) encourages us to write all the tests from the user's perspective. In other words, we try to test what the user sees and how they interact with our system. It means that the test pyramid **does not apply** to our concept as much. If we should write tests from the user perspective, it means that we should have **mostly integration** and **e2e** tests and very **few unit** tests 🧐. Integration tests are covered using _React Testing Library_.
```

Author: Very good point ,thank you! 🙏

Here I'm testing the integration, but not with as many different components as in the previous example. This helps me to still have **good integration tests** and also to test **many different use cases**.
So what would I be testing here? Here some examples:

1. *User selects only one filter and apply (chip button will behave differently -> showing a text)*
2. *User selects more than one filter and apply (chip button will behave differently -> showing a number)*
3. *User selects a filter, does not apply it and clicks outside to close the list and opens a list again afterwards (no filters should be applied or persisted)*
4. *Testing search:*
  1. *User types text in the search field (we want to find some results), selects a first result from top & applies it, opens a list again (to make sure that the selected filter is selected and the search field remains empty and does not contain the old value)*
  2. *User types text and there are no results for a given query*

This filter could, of course, be used at the top of a page and show some search results below. Major integration tests (including testing the whole page) would be something like:

> 1. *User selects a filter and there should be some search results* -> let's assert what will be rendered as a search result below
> 2. *User selects a filter, but there are no search results
> 3. *User selects a filter, but the backend returns a 400 or 500 -> let's assert that the error handling works properly

Reviewer: Not sure if the asterisks were intentional or a formatting glitch, but maybe there's a tweak here?

```suggestion
1. *User selects a filter and there should be some search results* -> let's assert what will be rendered as a search result below
2. *User selects a filter, but there are no search results*
3. *User selects a filter, but the backend returns a 400 or 500* -> let's assert that the error handling works properly
```

```

> 💡 Use the comments if you think they might be **helpful** and do not get **outdated**.

### Mocks assertions: please be as specific as possible

If you use some mocks and write assertions for them, please don’t forget to check:

- ✅ how many **times** a mocked function has been called (very important for all service mocks) → use `toHaveBeenCalledTimes(...)`
- ✅ check the **args** → use `toHaveBeenCalledWith(…)`
- ✨Use `expect.objectContaining` with **caution**:
  - Use it if you only want to check a **subset** of the argument that is relevant to the case being tested (this can help improve the test durability, for instance).
  - Sometimes it may be **overused**, and important assertions may not be tested.

> 💡 `toHaveBeenCalled()` → is not very specific so please use both methods mentioned above ☝️

### Don’t copy component’s logic into your test

Does it make sense to copy-paste the logic and write tests like this? 🤔

```tsx
// in the component:
<Table.Cell>{truncate(description || "", { length: 60 }) || "--"}</Table.Cell>;

// 😱 in your test:
expect(description).toHaveTextContent(
  truncate(field.description || "", { length: 60 }) || "--",
);
```

> 👉 Test should help us to **catch** bugs and doing copy-paste like this we won't be aware of any bugs or problems…

Reviewer: I think we could do more in the section to cover _why_ copying over this kind of logic from the implementation into the test is risky

(maybe don't take my writing here directly, but to give an idea:

```suggestion
👉 Test should help us to **catch** bugs and doing copy-paste like this we won't be aware of any bugs or problems, because we're reusing the logic and not actually testing what it does!
```
